trying to develop this system. Who was the
director of the? Hood Gibson, G.D. Gibson, and
J.D. Pruitt was the associate director. He was the
one that came to Matagorda County and talked to me
about my interest in coming up here. I said, what
does the future hold after that? Well, the future,
you know, he planted the idea that, I guess I'd been
spotted in terms of, you know, the work I've done
with my master and so forth. He, um, suggested that
maybe after that there might be a possibility for
further graduate study that they see if they could
find help for me. Compare the, these are the only
salary numbers I'm going to ask, what was your,
what was your, your... I remember my first salary,
$2,650. That was here? No, at the county. At the
county. And I guess I was, when I left Matagorda
County, I was probably in the mid $3,000, $3,500,
$3,800 in there, and I think when I came up here, I
can't remember without referring, but it wasn't a
lot more than that. And this is what year? 1955.
1955. And you had to furnish a car. Now you've got
some expenses for a car, usually a flat mile, but
your county agent wore a car out almost every year.
I mean, in fact, for a while there, I did have to buy a
car almost every year because it went on so many
miles. And when you got here, where were the
offices? Well, they are now in the system
building. Well... About that time, well, they had
just moved. There used to be what's now the Trigon.
The whole building was an extension building. And
about the time when I came up here, they had located
their headquarters offices in the system
building on the north side of the system building,
where they still are. And the specialists that had
been all in one building together were then housed
with the departments, the agronomists, the
animal scientists, and so forth. So it was
basically the administrative staff plus the
bookkeeping and all of that. Well, they had more of
that building. They had the second floor, too, the
offices over there. And Director Gibson reported
to whom, as far as you know? Well, there were
several reorganizations, and through the years
there was always a change. I think at that time he
reported to the president of the system. I guess at
that time, I don't know when the system
organization came in. It comes and goes. It comes
and goes. But I think basically he reported to
Gilchrist, I guess. And where did you and your wife
find a place to live? Over in South College
Station. And we just rented because we had this
notion that probably would be going off to further
graduate study after that. And after finishing or
doing pretty much all of this number crunching,
and we didn't have all the fancy computers in those
days, had to do everything with a calculator, we
used the Gilmer-Akin thing as a model of trying to,
what we came up with was we had a measure of what we
thought the counties deserved in terms of a staff,
and then a way to break down the finances. As I said,
if a county had a lot of resources, they were
expected to pay more and more for each particular
agent because, I don't know if you're aware of
this, agents always receive a part of their salary
directly from the county. That's right. And
usually the expenses, office, secretaries were
furnished by the counties, and the agents were
drawing anywhere from $20 to $30, $40, $50,
depending on the situation, some of them much more
than that, from the county. You'd get a separate
check. You'd get a check from A&M and They took all
the deductions out of here in terms of retirement
programs and insurance and everything. And the
county didn't do any of that. And so you had two
checks that you got paid for. Anyway, after I had,
and I worked in the administrative building over
there because I had to have constant access to the
administrative staff. And we often met with them
to, you know, explore ideas and ways to do it, and
then I'd have to do more number crunching, and they
wanted this, and it didn't look right, so I'd do
more number crunching. Anyway, I went through a
lot of this, and then I also, during that period,
was
that afterwards? No, I guess that was later.
Anyway, I came here in 55, and along about that
time, They organized this National Extension
Center for Advanced Study at University of
Wisconsin, financed by Kellogg. And they gave
fellowships, which means you didn't have to work.
And it was considered a very generous fellowship
if you could qualify. Well, I had a choice of going
to There was another program that several
administrators participated in was the public
administration program at Harvard. But you'd get
a doctorate of public administration, which,
although it would have been nice to go to Harvard
and have that in your record, I thought a PhD was
probably better from anywhere else. And
Wisconsin was fairly respectable as far as the
graduate school is concerned. Anyway, Kellogg
provided a grant for five years of getting Oh, a
couple of dozen or so young people or mid-career
people identified that might have other
administrative potential. And it was a
competitive thing. You applied, and if you got it,
you got a, at that time, I think it was $4,800 a year
tax-free income. And so in 1957, we took off. And as
I think I mentioned to you before, I anticipated
these moves. I finished the program in 18 months,
if you can believe this, because I could study full
time, and I also had, at that time they still
required the two languages. I had done all of my
homework on the languages and passed my exams on
the languages very early, whereas most of my
colleagues in the program were spending more time
on the languages than they were on the courses. So I
took a full load, got my languages out of the way,
and then as far as my thesis study, further
elaboration of this measuring county workload
and financing thing and developed into a 350-page
thesis. Now, did you take leave? I was given leave.
Given leave without pay. But still. With no
assurance that I'd get that particular job, but
they said, you will have a job when you come back.
And in fact, Hutchison was director by then. He
wanted me to come back early. He kept pressuring.
They had some assignments for me that they wanted
me to do. And I had some other offers when I left
there, but he arranged to offer me the assistant
director position for some special activity
areas. And that made me a member of the
administrative staff. I guess I was only, what,
30, 31 years old by then. But I became a part of the
administration at that time. I guess when I was
administrative assistant, I really wasn't
officially a part. But he had me come back as
assistant director. And that's 1957? No, that
would be 59. I went to school in 57. 57, came back in
59, and I think I became assistant director. I'm
coming into the rudder years now, I guess. That's
the same year I got here. I came back here in 59, in
the spring of 59, and was involved in several
special projects.
Describe, as you came as assistant director,
describe the Extension Service and its
leadership. What was its organization? Well,
John Hutchison was director by then, and he was an
outstanding director. And I enjoyed serving with
him. He was director, I guess, 19 years. And J.D.
Pruitt was associate director. They made a good
combination, Mr. Pruitt was not a what you call a
gregarious person to deal with and I had of course
going through administrative training programs
I had always felt that an organization would work
effectively if you could have what I call the Mr.
Outside and Mr. Inside. And the outside man had to
be the head man because most of the time people
don't want to deal with the number two or three
person. And I saw that operate. Hutchison was very
effective working with the legislature, with the
leadership in the state. Mr. Pruitt did the work
back home in terms of all the staffing and budgets
and personnel problems and all of that. I guess the
administrative staff at that time was about eight
or nine people. You had a state program leader for
agriculture, one in home economics, 4-H,
communications, fiscal, personnel, all of those
types of things. And it was a good learning
experience to work that closely to
administration. Had the black and white agents
yet been integrated? That came, I guess, In the
60s. That involved me very heavily. Oh, okay. We
had to go through a lot of the things at that time
with that program. And also I got a lot of special
assignments. Kellogg at that time had financed
another program called the National Agriculture
Communications Project, centered at Iowa State
University, in which they trained two or three
people in each state intensively, and it was kind
of the in-thing then of principles of
communication, organizations function better,
people could communicate better, and you could
reach audiences better. There was a lot of this was
based on Bowen and Beale's sociology work at Iowa
State where they learned how the process of how new
ideas are accepted, they call it the fusion
process, of when people first hear about a new
idea. how they go about the mental processes they
go through, and finally accepting a new variety of
corn or a new way of doing things or something. We
were given training.
Three of us were selected to participate in an
intensive three-week program at the University
of Wyoming. And then we came back, and we had to
train everybody in the staff, all 1,100, 1,200
people that were on the staff about that time in
district meetings, different kinds of state
meetings, two or three day, I guess, meetings
where we gave everybody this
type of training. interpersonal relations and
communications and how you get ideas across to
people and get them to accept them and all this type
of thing. That was a very exciting project. As I
said, I was involved in special things. Back in the
county, I had already gotten extremely
frustrated with the lack of any guidance in terms
of how files were kept in the counties because the
county agents had to depository of all kinds of
information. And you had a real problem. Every
county agent set up their own system, and no two
people think. And I guess part of that was my
library experience. I knew that you could
organize things. And so I started out in the county
of trying. At that time, I had worked in the library
here. I had to do a decimal system. I thought, well,
why can't you use the same principles, maybe in
organizing office files? But I found out that that
was a little too complicated for the average
agent. So I started on my own in the county of
developing a sort of a filing system. And my
contention was that if there was a similar filing
system in every county, that when agents went from
one county to the other, they would either face one
problem of learning the other guy's or his
predecessor's system, which probably was
incomprehensible, or set up his own, which was a
very huge process because in most counties you had
five or six, ten file cabinets full of
information. I mean, you had to have, you know,
somebody come in, what's the formula for a
whitewashing offense? I mean, you don't remember
these things, you have to have a place to find this
information. And so I, so it had been tried before
three or three times in Texas and always bogged
down. It had been tried in other states, it had been
tried nationally, and I said, I think I can do it.
And I was given full time off and resources to do it,
and I developed this system in about a year's time,
but I involved everybody in the staff, every
specialist. We set up the sections by
disciplines, animal science, but we did it as an
agent would look at it. You know, he wouldn't look
at it in terms of, you know, breeding and so forth,
but he would look at it from the way he does it. So we
set up a rather elaborate filing system, and we
went We trained, gave people, everybody in the
state, a full day training program on it, and even
provided the materials of the dividers, the
guidance, and so forth. So that was a very, I
thought it was a thing that made a great
contribution to the organization. And as far as I
know, the system is still being utilized. So I was
kind of jumping from projects to projects. And
gradually, I was beginning. what I'd call more
real administrative responsibilities.
When you started out, did you replace anybody? No,
no, I think it was more of a new slot for special
projects, I guess you'd call it. But gradually I
was given responsibility over units of other
people, like in that period of time, community
development became a big new thrust from the
Lyndon Johnson, you know, working with
low-income farmers and so forth, and I started
giving leadership to some of those kind of
programs, or had the people that were employed in
those areas, and got involved in, I was always
available for special things, the Century Study,
I got stuck in that. That was in the 60s. Mr. Rutter
was, early on, was president of both the campus and
the system. So Dr. Hutchinson, no, Hutchinson,
isn't it? Hutchinson. H-U-T-C-H-I-S-O-N?
Hutchinson, yeah. All right. He reported to
President Rutter that, the what was Mr. Rudder's
what was their working relationship and how do you
think he felt about the extension service Rudder?
Did they did they work well together? I think so I
mean I think so Mr. Rudder had a good understanding
of rural agricultural I mean he had that
background himself I think he recognized the
important role that the extension service played
particularly in the 90 percent of the counties in
of thing, and I think he recognized, which I always
say, land grant, I have made the statement at land
grant meetings that, you know, you get a lot of
people that come out of non-land grant situations
that get into leadership positions, and I always
say that presidents of non-land grant
universities would give their right arm to have
what a land grant university president has with
this outreach into every single community. I
think a lot of presidents that don't have that
appreciation don't realize what they have with
the extension service. And I think Mr. Rudder
understood that, and I think he used the extension
service for... Can you think of any examples where
he demonstrated how well he could relate to
agricultural people? Mr. Rudder? Yeah, places
where he used to... Well, he was always at home in
agricultural circles. I mean, he had no
problem... Well, I guess he was at home in all kinds
of circles, but You know, he did grow up in a rural
area and understood farmers and farmers'
problems. I don't think he was a farmer himself,
was he? I think they had... They had a ranch. They
did have a ranch, but they had business that served
farmers. Yeah, yeah. But he had a good
understanding of, I think, farm problems and I
think supported the Extension Service very well,
and as far as I know, at least from my vantage point,
there were no problems in terms of relationships
and so forth. Would you agree with me? I think that
he felt more relaxed and comfortable in front of an
agricultural group than he did in front of a
faculty group. Yeah, I'd say that's probably a
fair assessment. There was a lot of, I guess,
unhappiness that I detected during the century
study and so forth, particularly from people who
At about that time, I would guess in engineering
and agriculture that 80% of the faculty were A&M
graduates themselves. Of course, then the
decision was made to try to get more outside, which
was necessary if the school was going to grow. But I
think there was a lot of resentment on the pure
academics that he had no academic credentials as
such. Now, as far as I remember, the Century Study
is 62-3-4, and you were appointed to the
committee, weren't you? They had four task
forces. I worked with one of the task forces.
That's what I thought. The chairman I worked with
was Harry Moore, and they had 25. Describe what you
can remember of that task force's work. Describe
what that task force did. Well, it was a very
interesting experience. I mean, these were the
very top people in Texas, political, industrial,
business, agricultural, you name it, top
leaders, men and women. all parts of the state. It
was interesting to see how they interacted and
became a group and made their recommendation. I
think each task force has sort of an area to look at.
And the staff person was kind of the go-for. You
know, made arrangements for the meetings and got
the resource people they needed, kept notes of the
meeting and wrote up their materials, which were
turned into your group, I guess, and processed
them somehow. I don't remember all the details,
but it was an interesting experience. Do you think
that was an important activity in terms of its
long-range results? It was absolutely
essential. A&M would not have been anywhere from
my viewpoint where they are today, because the
report dealt with the basic issues about
co-education, mandatory core thing, name
change, all of those things, as I think we
indicated before. My own conclusion is nobody
could have done this other than Earl Rudder,
because he did have a non-academic background,
but he knew that he had to have the state
leadership. If the state leadership made these
recommendations, that they would be more
acceptable, and I think it turned out that way. Do
you remember any opinions Dr. Hutchinson had
about some of those basic changes?
Well, he didn't, I mean, he didn't, deliberately
didn't try to influence me. I was just pretty much,
I guess that was almost a full-time assignment
those days. Almost. I mean, I didn't. Like, I never
heard of his being for or against. No, I think he was
a true blue Aggie, and I think he had to, but he was
also progressive. He'd gone to the University of
Chicago and got his Ph.D. I mean, I think he
recognized that some of the change, but he tended
to be, you know, conservative, uh, I know he had a
real problem, and I told my wife the other day, I
think if it hadn't been for me, he would have got
himself in trouble. He was a hard time accepting
women wearing pants. Really? Describe that,
because that's good history. Well, there was a
period there when women started wearing what are
called pantsuits, something like that, and he was
just adamantly against it. He just thought it was
not professionally appropriate, and I I guess I
was a little of the younger generation, and I told
him, don't waste your shots on it. It's a fashion
thing. It's probably come and go. But he had a real
hard time accepting it. You see, if you go back far
enough in time, I mean, that generation, it was
like school teaching. A woman couldn't teach if
she was married, for example, or divorced or
something like that. It was a different area. I
think he had also... more conservative
viewpoints about the racial thing. I mean, I'm
sure that he felt the way the system had arranged
it, and I think it was from a sincere basis that he
felt the black community was better served with
having their own professionals. They could
relate to each other, and there's some evidence
that's true. I mean, even now they try to identify
people. There was one other thing I got very
involved in that I'm very proud of that's, I guess,
made my reputation a little more national is that I
participated with the federal office. They had a
small research unit at the Department of
Agriculture in Washington, only a handful of
people. But in the war and poverty time days, some
monies became available for extra studies. We
were very concerned that we, with our home
economics program, particularly in nutrition,
that we weren't you know, really reaching people
effectively, the poorest of the poor. And this is
very unusual for Extension to get involved that
deeply, but there was a lady who was a research
expert out of Washington, and if you look at my
resume, that's identified on there as a
publication that Dr. Starley Hunter and I did a
long-term project In the Hispanic area of El Paso,
what was unusual about it, in this type of a thing,
we actually had a control group. It's called
Reaching Mexican-American Families. We
actually had about an area of 700, 800 families,
another area that demographically,
statistically, was similar. We didn't do any work
with this group, but we worked with the other
group. And well, to make a long story short, we
found out that we could utilize what we call
paraprofessionals, people out of that
community, homemakers, mothers, bring them in
and employ them at minimum wage, give them
intensive training in nutrition, human
nutrition, and let them go back out in the
communities and that they could get access to the
homes where a professional could not. And we found
that, and it was a seven-year project, we found
that using this technique was an effective way of
reaching this audience. They actually improved
in their knowledge of nutrition and made some
changes in their practices We had identified one
of the problems was that as much of the population
was in a migratory status that had come from
Mexico, what we found particularly with the
succeeding generations is that they brought the
best of both cultures and pick up the worst, I mean
fast food, potato chip, protein. If you analyze
their own diets the way they were in the
traditional days, they were probably pretty good
in terms of the beans. And anyway, we identified
that this could be done with low-income
audiences. And this gave rise to a program, I don't
know if you've heard about, you probably did if you
were president, of the Expanded Food and
Nutrition Educational Program, which was
financed in the Johnson war and poverty days. I
guess it even started out, I guess, even the
Kennedy times, but money started becoming
available. And the Department of Agriculture was
given special monies by Congress to carry out a
nationwide program of reaching the poorest of the
poor with a nutrition program. And it was based on
the results. And that program continues to this
day, although it has not been funded. Its funding
has diminished. We, the basic unit in Texas, every
state was given the money but could operate the
program. But it was based on the principles that we
had identified of employing paraprofessionals,
giving them intensive training, even though they
may have only had little or no formal education
themselves. But they were given very simple
materials, recipes to get into the homes and try to
get families to. There was no money given. It also,
but these people were given information about
when they found problems, they went house to
house, or what they were encouraged to do is to get
two or three or four of their neighbors together
and talk about these things. But they were also
given information about the other social
services that were available for families, food
stamps later on and all this type of thing. And a lot
of these people were unaware, a lot of these people
were totally afraid of government or anything.
These people were not even identified as
government. They were just neighbors helping
you. And I think it was a successful program. And as
I said, I think it's, as I said, this research that
we participated in, it was a difficult thing to do
because you had to train people to do it. You had to
get detailed information about what they, when we
started the project, we went into the
experimental area and actually found out the base
of knowledge. people had about nutrition. Then we
conducted the program and measured it two years
later, and then again seven years later as to the
actual changes. Did the same thing with the
control group. It was an interesting project, but
as I said, it was one of the bases used for this
national program that Congress funded and still
continues to fund. In fact, that program, I was,
the basic unit in Texas, which I was given sort of,
even though it was a home economics area, it was
given the responsibility of the training, the
intellectual support of the training materials
and so forth. The home economics staff, of course,
the nutritionists were involved in the nutrition
training of it. And what we did, we set up only in
urban areas and a few rural areas what we call an
expanded foods and nutrition unit, which
included 30 paraprofessionals. which was too
money for one professional to supervise. So we had
an intermediate group called program
aides, who were also people of that community. But
they worked full time, were paid full time. And one
professional. So a unit consisted of 30 people,
mostly women in most cases, homemakers
themselves, who were employed. to reach out to
their neighbors and friends on this program. You
had a program aide who supervised 10 of those. You
had to schedule things pretty carefully. You do
this block and this type of thing. They were
trained every week, given a half a day of training
every week. And then you had one professional
nutritionist who supervised the whole program.
This led to, talking about the growth of
bureaucracy, I once was at a land grant meeting.
some Californian you know they have the huge
counties out there bragging about the size of
their staffs and I said well I can I think I can top
your story I said we have one county where we have
over 100 employees he was absolutely staggered
and it became I could actually in San Antonio we set
up there's only city we set up two units if you're
familiar with San Antonio they have both the
So that was 34 times two. And then we got a Sears
funding project for doing work with low-income
youth, a 4-H program. And they hired part-time
paraprofessionals, about 30 or 40 of those. So you
add all those together, not even counting the
professional staff at one time. We had over 100
people working in one county alone. But this was
mostly either federal money or
trying to reach low-income families. We need to
quit, because you go to 10 o'clock. Aren't we about
through?